adding rosdep tutorial (#2561)
ros2/ros2_documentation: source/Tutorials/Rosdep.rst

.. _rosdep:

Managing Dependencies W/ rosdep
===============================

Author: Steve Macenski

> Last edited: May 13, 2022

Reviewer: minor: a "last edited" line is not something we are doing for other articles and so I think this is unlikely to be updated with future edits. We can at least see the last edit in this Git repo. I would just remove this line.

This tutorial will explain how to manage external dependencies using ``rosdep``.

> ``rosdep`` is ROS's dependency management utility that can work with ROS packages and external libraries.

Reviewer: minor: this line seems like it belongs in the next section.

What is rosdep?
---------------

``rosdep`` is a command-line utility for identifying and installing dependencies to build or install a package.
It can be or is invoked when:

- Building a workspace and needing appropriate dependencies to build the packages within

> - ``apt`` install packages (e.g. ``sudo apt install ros-{DISTRO}-demo-nodes-cpp``) to check the dependencies needed for it to execute

Reviewer: I'm not sure I understand this point. When we install a package with `apt`, it should also install any necessary runtime dependencies. We don't need rosdep for this.

Author: `apt` removed

> - ``apt`` install packages (e.g. ``sudo apt install ros-rolling-nav2-simple-commander``) to check the dependencies needed for it to execute

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- ``apt`` install packages (e.g. ``sudo apt install ros-{DISTRO}-nav2-simple-commander``) to check the dependencies needed for it to execute
```

Besides that, I'll suggest using a different package as the example here, just because `nav2-simple-commander` isn't always available in all ROS distributions (for instance, it isn't currently available in Rolling or Humble at the moment).  I'd suggest `ros-{DISTRO}-demo-nodes-cpp`, but you could use another core package if you prefer.

Finally, once the packages are found, they are installed and ready to go!

The central index is known as ``rosdistro``, which `may be found here <https://github.com/ros/rosdistro>`_.
We'll explore that more in the next section.

How do I know what keys to put in my package.xml?
-------------------------------------------------

Great question, I'm glad you asked!

For ROS packages (e.g. ``nav2_bt_navigator``), you may simply place the name of the package.
You can find a list of all released ROS packages in ``rosdistro`` at ``<distro>/distribution.yaml`` for your given ROS distribution.

For non-ROS package system dependencies, we will need to find the keys for a particular library.
In general, there are two files of interest: ``rosdep/base.yaml`` and ``rosdep/python.yaml``.
``base.yaml`` in general contains the ``apt`` system dependencies.
``python.yaml`` in general contains the ``pip`` python dependencies.

To find a key, search for your library in this file (preferably ctrl+F, its long) and find the name in ``yaml`` that contains it.
This is the key to put in a ``package.xml`` file.

> For example, imagine a package had a dependency on ``doxygen`` because they're a great piece of software that cares about quality documentation (hint hint).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, imagine a package had a dependency on ``doxygen`` because it is a great piece of software that cares about quality documentation (hint hint).
```

We would search ``base.yaml`` for ``doxygen`` and come across:

.. code-block:: yaml

  doxygen:
    arch: [doxygen]
    debian: [doxygen]
    fedora: [doxygen]
    freebsd: [doxygen]
    gentoo: [app-doc/doxygen]
    macports: [doxygen]
    nixos: [doxygen]
    openembedded: [doxygen@meta-oe]
    opensuse: [doxygen]
    rhel: [doxygen]
    ubuntu: [doxygen]

That means our rosdep key is ``doxygen``, which would resolve to those various names in different operating system's package managers for installation.

What if my library isn't in rosdistro?
--------------------------------------

If your library isn't in ``rosdistro``, you can experience the greatness that is open-source software development: you can add it yourself!
Pull requests for rosdistro are typically merged well within a week.

`Detailed instructions may be found here <https://github.com/ros/rosdistro/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#rosdep-rules-contributions>`_ for how to contribute new rosdep keys.

> If for some reason these may not be contributed openly, it is possible to fork rosdistro and maintain a private index for use.

Reviewer 2: I'm wondering if we should explain how to do that, or point to documentation that explains it.  Do you know of existing documentation that explains how to fork rosdistro for private use?

Author: I've seen something somewhere years ago, but I'm not going to try to dig it up. I looked at that comment as a nice 'hook' to make people think about the fact that this is possible, because it is something that comes up in conversations not infrequently.  Either way, that's a power user type feature, not something that we should get into for the purposes of a 'first look' tutorial guide.

Author: I could remove it if you like, but I think its nice to at least mention and then someone can do research at that point

Reviewer 2: > I could remove it if you like, but I think its nice to at least mention and then someone can do research at that point

No, I agree it is valuable to mention.  I just thought we might have some existing documentation about it, but I don't think we do.  In that case, we can leave this as a "hanging" question, and move on with this PR otherwise.

The only thing I'm going to request here is that we change the word "private" to either "custom" or "alternate", which more closely matches what my searches find.  Once that is done, I'm happy to approve this.

How do I use the rosdep tool?
-----------------------------

Now that we have some understanding of ``rosdep``, ``package.xml``, and ``rosdistro``, we're ready to use the utility itself!
Firstly, if this is the first time using ``rosdep``, it must be initialized via:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo rosdep init
    rosdep update

This will initialize rosdep and ``update`` will update the locally cached rosdistro index.
It is a good idea to ``update`` rosdep on occasion to get the latest index.

Finally, we can run ``rosdep install`` to install dependencies.
Typically, this is run over a workspace with many packages in a single call to install all dependencies.
A call for that would appear as the following, if in the root of the workspace with directory ``src`` containing source code.

.. code-block:: bash

>     rosdep install --from-paths src -y --ignore-src

Reviewer: Maybe it's worth also adding the `--rosdistro` option to the example command, since I think rosdep will complain if the environment variable ROS_DISTRO is not set? (e.g. if the user didn't source an underlay with `ros_workspace` installed).

Author: It will automatically populate if `ROS_DISTRO` is set, this shoudn't be exhaustive, they can always use `-h` to get more info

Author: Added a comment about `-h`

Pull requests for rosdistro are typically merged well within a week.

`Detailed instructions may be found here <https://github.com/ros/rosdistro/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#rosdep-rules-contributions>`_ for how to contribute new rosdep keys.
If for some reason these may not be contributed openly, it is possible to fork rosdistro and maintain a private index for use.

How do I use the rosdep tool?
-----------------------------

Now that we have some understanding of ``rosdep``, ``package.xml``, and ``rosdistro``, we're ready to use the utility itself!
Firstly, if this is the first time using ``rosdep``, it must be initialized via:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo rosdep init
    rosdep update

This will initialize rosdep and ``update`` will update the locally cached rosdistro index.
It is a good idea to ``update`` rosdep on occasion to get the latest index.

Finally, we can run ``rosdep install`` to install dependencies.
Typically, this is run over a workspace with many packages in a single call to install all dependencies.
A call for that would appear as the following, if in the root of the workspace with directory ``src`` containing source code.

.. code-block:: bash

>     rosdep install --from-paths src -r -y --ignore-src

Reviewer 3: Please don't add `-r`, which makes `rosdep` ignore errors.

Far too many Q&As on ROS Answers have turned out to be users unable to properly parse the output of `apt`/`<whichever-package-manager-their-platform-uses>` and simply report: "yes, `rosdep` completed successfully, so everything should be installed".

And then it turns out `rosdep` ignored some errors or packages it couldn't find because of `-r`.

Author: Done
